Update 20.pharmaceuticals.md (#876)
greenelab/covid19-review: content/20.pharmaceuticals.md

Clinical trials that are in progress are likely to provide additional insight into the effectiveness of this drug for the treatment of COVID-19 along with how it should be administered.

#### Monoclonal Neutralizing Antibodies

Monoclonal antibodies have revolutionized the way we treat human diseases. 
They have become some of the best-selling drugs in the pharmaceutical market in recent years [@doi:10.1186/s12929-019-0592-z]. 
There are currently 79 FDA approved mAbs on the market, including antibodies for viral infections (e.g. Ibalizumab for HIV and Palivizumab for RSV) [@doi:10.1186/s12929-019-0592-z; @doi:10.1146/annurev-immunol-032712-095916]. 
Virus-specific neutralizing antibodies commonly target viral surface glycoproteins or host structures, thereby inhibiting viral entry through receptor binding interference [@doi:10.3389/fmicb.2017.02323; @doi:10.1080/21645515.2017.1337614]. 
This is predicted to reduce the viral load, mitigate disease, and reduce overall hospitalization. 

> While polyclonal antibodies from convalescent plasma can be used as a treatment for COVID-19, this section focuses on current efforts in developing monoclonal neutralizing antibodies against SARS-CoV-2 (excellent reviews regarding convalescent plasma therapy can be found here [doi: 10.1016/ S1473-3099(20)30141-9; @ 10.1001/jama.2020.4940]). 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
While polyclonal antibodies from convalescent plasma can be used as a treatment for COVID-19, this section focuses on current efforts in developing monoclonal neutralizing antibodies against SARS-CoV-2 (excellent reviews regarding convalescent plasma therapy can be found here [@doi:10/ggqr7s; @doi:10.1001/jama.2020.4940]). 
```

Specifically, we focus on monoclonal antibodies that have recently been granted emergency use authorization and discuss the challenges in the successful development of monoclonal neutralizing antibodies.

> During the first SARS epidemic in 2002, nAbs were found in SARS-CoV-1-infected patients [@doi:10.1111/j.1469-0691.2004.01009.x;@doi:10.1086/423286]. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
During the first SARS epidemic in 2002, nAbs were found in SARS-CoV-1-infected patients [@doi:10.1111/j.1469-0691.2004.01009.x; @doi:10.1086/423286]. 
```

Several studies following up on these findings identified various S-glycoprotein epitopes as the major targets of nAbs against SARS-CoV-1 [@doi:10.1517/14712590902763755]. 
Coronaviruses use trimeric spike (S) glycoproteins on their surface to bind to the host cell, allowing for cell entry [@doi:10.1016/j.cell.2020.02.052; @doi:10.1016/j.cell.2020.02.058]. 
Each S glycoprotein protomer is comprised of an S1 domain, also called the RBD, and an S2 domain. 
The S1 domain binds to the host cell while the S2 domain facilitates the fusion between the viral envelope and host cell membranes [@doi:10.1517/14712590902763755]. 
The genomic identity between the RBD of SARS-CV-1 and SARS-CoV-2 is around 76%. 
Due to this high degree of similarity, preexisting antibodies against SARS-CoV-1 were initially considered candidates for neutralizing activity against SARS-CoV-2. 

> While some antibodies developed against SARS-CoV-1 spike protein showed cross-neutralization activity with SARS-CoV-2 [@doi: 10.1016/j.tips.2020.07.004; @doi:10.1038/s41586-020-2349-y], others failed to bind to SARS-CoV-2 spike protein at relevant concentrations [@doi:10.1126/science.abb2507]. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
While some antibodies developed against SARS-CoV-1 spike protein showed cross-neutralization activity with SARS-CoV-2 [@doi:10.1016/j.tips.2020.07.004; @doi:10.1038/s41586-020-2349-y], others failed to bind to SARS-CoV-2 spike protein at relevant concentrations [@doi:10.1126/science.abb2507]. 
```

The first human monoclonal neutralizing antibody specifically against the SARS-CoV-2 S glycoprotein was developed using hybridoma technology [@doi:10.1101/2020.03.11.987958], where antibody-producing B-cells developed by mice can be inserted into myeloma cells to produce a hybrid cell line (the hybridoma) that is grown in culture. 
The 47D11 antibody clone was able to cross-neutralize SARS-CoV-1 and SARS-CoV-2. This antibody (now ABVV-47D11) has recently entered clinical trials in collaboration with AbbVie. 
Since then, an extensive monoclonal neutralizing antibody pipeline has been developed to combat the ongoing pandemic, with over 50 different antibodies in clinical trials [@doi:10.1016/j.bsheal.2021.02.001] and two treatments recently receiving emergency use authorization by the FDA.

##### Bamlanivimab (LY-CoV555) and Etesevimab (LY-CoV016)

Bamlanivimab is a human monoclonal antibody that was derived from convalescent plasma of a recovered COVID-19 patient based on research from the National Institute for Allergy’s and Infectious Diseases (NIAID) and subsequently developed by AbCellera and Eli Lilly. 

> The neutralizing activity of bamlanivimab was initially demonstrated in vivo using a nonhuman primate model [@doi: 10.1101/2020.09.30.318972]. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The neutralizing activity of bamlanivimab was initially demonstrated _in vivo_ using a nonhuman primate model [@doi:10.1101/2020.09.30.318972]. 
```

In these studies, prophylactic Ly-CoV555 infusions protected rhesus macaques from SARS-CoV-2 infection. 
Based on the positive preclinical data, Eli Lilly initiated the first human clinical trial for a monoclonal antibody against SARS-CoV-2. 

> The phase 1 trial which was conducted in hospitalized COVID-19 patients was completed in August 2020 (NCT04411628).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The phase 1 trial which was conducted in hospitalized COVID-19 patients was completed in August 2020 [@clinicaltrials:NCT04411628].
```

Estesevimab (LY-CoV016 or JS-016) is also a monoclonal neutralizing antibody against the spike protein of SARS-CoV-2. 

> It was initially developed by Junshi Biosciences and later licensed and developed through Eli Lilly. A phase 1 clinical trial to assess the safety of etesevimab was completed in October 2020 (NCT04441931). 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
It was initially developed by Junshi Biosciences and later licensed and developed through Eli Lilly.
A phase 1 clinical trial to assess the safety of etesevimab was completed in October 2020 [@clinicaltrials:NCT04441931]. 
```

> Etesevimab was shown to bind a different epitope on the spike protein than bamlanivimab, suggesting that the two antibodies used as a combination therapy would further enhance their clinical use compared to a monotherapy [doi:10.1001/jama.2021.0202].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Etesevimab was shown to bind a different epitope on the spike protein than bamlanivimab, suggesting that the two antibodies used as a combination therapy would further enhance their clinical use compared to a monotherapy [@doi:10.1001/jama.2021.0202].
```

> To assess the efficacy and safety of bamlanivimab alone or in combination with etesevimab for the treatment of COVID-19, a phase 2/3 trial (BLAZE-1, NCT04427501) was initiated. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To assess the efficacy and safety of bamlanivimab alone or in combination with etesevimab for the treatment of COVID-19, a phase 2/3 trial (BLAZE-1) [@clinicaltrials:NCT04427501] was initiated. 
```

> The interim analysis of the phase 2 portion suggested that bamlanivimab alone was able to reduce accelerate the reduction in viral load [10.1056/NEJMoa2029849].

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The interim analysis of the phase 2 portion suggested that bamlanivimab alone was able to reduce accelerate the reduction in viral load [@doi:10.1056/NEJMoa2029849].
```

> However, more recent data suggests that only the bamlanivimab/etesevimab combination therapy is able to reduce viral load in COVID-19 patients [@doi: doi:10.1001/jama.2021.0202]. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
However, more recent data suggests that only the bamlanivimab/etesevimab combination therapy is able to reduce viral load in COVID-19 patients [@doi:10.1001/jama.2021.0202]. 
```

> Based on this data, the combination therapy has received emergency use authorization for COVID-19 by the FDA in February of 2021.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Based on this data, the combination therapy received emergency use authorization for COVID-19 from the FDA in February of 2021.
```

##### Casirivimab and Imdevimab (REGN-COV2) 

Casirivimab (REGN10933) and imdevimab (REGN10987) are two monoclonal antibodies against the SARS-CoV-2 spike protein.

> They were both developed by Regeneron in a parallel high-throughput screen to identify neutralizing antibodies from either humanized mice or patient-derived convalescent plasma [10.1126/science.abd0827].

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
They were both developed by Regeneron in a parallel high-throughput screen to identify neutralizing antibodies from either humanized mice or patient-derived convalescent plasma [@doi:10.1126/science.abd0827].
```

> In these efforts, multiple antibodies were characterized for their ability to bind and neutralize SARS-CoV-2 spike protein.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In these efforts, multiple antibodies were characterized for their ability to bind and neutralize the SARS-CoV-2 spike protein.
```

The authors hypothesized that an antibody cocktail, rather than each individual antibody could increase the therapeutic efficacy while minimizing the risk for virus escape.
Therefore, the authors tested pairs of individual antibodies for their ability to simultaneously bind the RBD of the spike protein.

> Based on this data, casirivimab and imdevimab were identified as the lead antibody pair, resulting in the initiation of two clinical trials (NCT04426695 and NCT04425629).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Based on this data, casirivimab and imdevimab were identified as the lead antibody pair, resulting in the initiation of two clinical trials [@clinicaltrials:NCT04426695; @clinicaltrials:NCT04425629].
```

> Data from this phase 1-3 trial published in the _New England Journal of Medicine_ shows that the REGN-COV2 antibody cocktail reduced viral load, particularly in patients with high viral load or whose endogenous immune response has not been initiated yet [@doi:10.1056/NEJMoa2035002].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Data from this phase 1-3 trial published in the _New England Journal of Medicine_ shows that the REGN-COV2 antibody cocktail reduced viral load, particularly in patients with high viral load or whose endogenous immune response had not yet been initiated [@doi:10.1056/NEJMoa2035002].
```

> Data from this phase 1-3 trial published in the New England Journal of Medicine shows that the REGN-COV2 antibody cocktail reduced viral load, particularly in patients with high viral load or whose endogenous immune response has not been initiated yet [@doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa2035002].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Data from this phase 1-3 trial published in the _New England Journal of Medicine_ shows that the REGN-COV2 antibody cocktail reduced viral load, particularly in patients with high viral load or whose endogenous immune response has not been initiated yet [@doi:10.1056/NEJMoa2035002].
```

However, in patients who already initiated an immune response, exogenous addition of REGN-COV2 did not improve the endogenous immune response.
Both doses were well tolerated with no serious events related to the antibody cocktail.
Based on this data, the FDA granted emergency use authorization for REGN-COV2 in patients with mild to moderate COVID-19 who are at risk to develop severe disease.

> Ongoing efforts are trying to evaluate the efficacy of REGN-COV2 to improve clinical outcomes in hospitalized patients (NCT04426695).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Ongoing efforts are trying to evaluate the efficacy of REGN-COV2 to improve clinical outcomes in hospitalized patients [@clinicaltrials:NCT04426695].
```

##### Viral Resistance to Neutralizing Antibodies

> With the ongoing global spread of new SARS-CoV-2 variants, there is a growing concern that mutations in SARS-CoV-2 spike protein can escape antibody neutralization, thereby reducing the efficacy of monoclonal antibody therapeutics and vaccines.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With the ongoing global spread of new SARS-CoV-2 variants, there is a growing concern that mutations in SARS-CoV-2 spike protein could escape antibody neutralization, thereby reducing the efficacy of monoclonal antibody therapeutics and vaccines.
```

A comprehensive mutagenesis screen recently identified several amino acid substitutions in the SARS-CoV-2 spike protein that can prevent antibody neutralization [@doi:10.1016/j.chom.2021.01.014].
While some mutations result in resistance to only one antibody, others confer broad resistance to multiple monoclonal antibodies as well as polyclonal huma sera, suggesting that some amino acids are “hotspots” for antibody resistance.
However, it was not investigated whether the resistant mutations identified result in a fitness advantage.

> Accordingly, an impact on neutralizing efficiency has been reported for the emerging UK (B.1.1.7) and South Africa (B.1.351) variants [@doi: 10.21203/rs.3.rs-228079/v1; @doi: 10.1101/2021.02.03.429355; @doi: 10.1101/2021.01.25.428137].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Accordingly, an impact on neutralizing efficiency has been reported for the emerging UK (B.1.1.7) and South Africa (B.1.351) variants [@doi:10.21203/rs.3.rs-228079/v1; @doi:10.1101/2021.02.03.429355; @doi:10.1101/2021.01.25.428137].
```

> While the reported impact on antibody neutralization needs to be confirmed in vivo, it suggests that some adjustments to therapeutic antibody treatments may be necessary to maintain the efficacy that was reported in previous clinical trials. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
While the reported impact on antibody neutralization needs to be confirmed _in vivo_, it suggests that some adjustments to therapeutic antibody treatments may be necessary to maintain the efficacy that was reported in previous clinical trials. 
```

Antibody cocktails such as REGN-COV2, CT-P59, and AZD7442 have been developed to overcome the risk for attenuation of neutralizing activity of a single monoclonal antibody.
These cocktails consist of antibodies that recognize different epitopes on the spike protein, decreasing the likelihood that a single amino acid change can cause resistance to all antibodies in the cocktail.

> However, neutralizing resistance can emerge even against an antibody cocktail if the individual antibodies target subdominant epitopes [@doi: 10.1101/2021.02.03.429355]. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
However, neutralizing resistance can emerge even against an antibody cocktail if the individual antibodies target subdominant epitopes [@doi:10.1101/2021.02.03.429355]. 
```

> Another strategy is to develop broadly neutralizing antibodies that target structures that are highly conserved, as these are less likely to mutate [@doi: 10.1016/j.immuni.2007.11.018; @doi: 10.1126/science.1171491] or to target epitopes that are insensitive to mutations [@doi:10.1016/j.vaccine.2006.04.054].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Another strategy is to develop broadly neutralizing antibodies that target structures that are highly conserved, as these are less likely to mutate [@doi:10.1016/j.immuni.2007.11.018; @doi:10.1126/science.1171491] or to target epitopes that are insensitive to mutations [@doi:10.1016/j.vaccine.2006.04.054].
```

> One such antibody (ADG-2) has recently been reported [@doi: 10.1126/science.abf4830].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
One such antibody (ADG-2) has recently been reported [@doi:10.1126/science.abf4830].
```

> This antibody targets a highly conserved epitope that overlaps the hACE2 receptor binding site of all clade 1 sarbecoviruses.

Reviewer 2: I believe we've been trying to avoid calling ACE2 a receptor in other sections.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This antibody targets a highly conserved epitope that overlaps the hACE2 binding site of all clade 1 sarbecoviruses.
```
I think we can just drop the word receptor and the sentence still works!

Prophylactic administration of ADG-2 in an immunocompetent mouse model of COVID-19 resulted in protection against viral replication in the lungs and respiratory burden.

> Since the epitope targeted by ADG-2 represents an Achilles’heel for clade 1 sarbecoviruses, this antibody might be a promising candidate against all circulating variants as well as emerging SARS-related coronaviruses.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Since the epitope targeted by ADG-2 represents an Achilles’ heel for clade 1 sarbecoviruses, this antibody might be a promising candidate against all circulating variants as well as emerging SARS-related coronaviruses.
```

> In just under a year since the first structure of the SARS-CoV-2 spike protein has been published, an impressive pipeline of monoclonal antibodies targeting SARS-CoV-2 has entered clinical trials with hundreds of more candidates in preclinical stages.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In just under a year since the structure of the SARS-CoV-2 spike protein was first published, an impressive pipeline of monoclonal antibodies targeting SARS-CoV-2 has entered clinical trials, with hundreds more candidates in preclinical stages.
```

> Technological advances in antibody drug design as well as in structural biology massively accelerated the discovery of novel antibody candidates and mechanism by which they interact with the target structure.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Technological advances in antibody drug design as well as in structural biology massively accelerated the discovery of novel antibody candidates and the mechanisms by which they interact with the target structure.
```

Ongoing research may be needed to optimize administration of TCZ [@doi:10.1016/j.jcv.2020.104443], although similar results were reported by one study for intravenous and subcutaneous administration [@doi:10/d2pk].
Clinical trials that are in progress are likely to provide additional insight into the effectiveness of this drug for the treatment of COVID-19 along with how it should be administered.

#### Monoclonal Neutralizing Antibodies

> Monoclonal antibodies have revolutionized the way we treat human diseases. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Monoclonal antibodies, antibodies that recognize a single epitope, have revolutionized the way we treat human diseases. 
```

Author: Not sure if that is necessary. I see where you are coming from but I think people usually know this.

Reviewer 3: Yea this was definitely coming someone like me that at one point knew the difference between mono and poly Ab but had to relook it up cuz it had been a while:) I'm fine removing it

They have become some of the best-selling drugs in the pharmaceutical market in recent years [@doi:10.1186/s12929-019-0592-z]. 
There are currently 79 FDA approved mAbs on the market, including antibodies for viral infections (e.g. Ibalizumab for HIV and Palivizumab for RSV) [@doi:10.1186/s12929-019-0592-z; @doi:10.1146/annurev-immunol-032712-095916]. 
Virus-specific neutralizing antibodies commonly target viral surface glycoproteins or host structures, thereby inhibiting viral entry through receptor binding interference [@doi:10.3389/fmicb.2017.02323; @doi:10.1080/21645515.2017.1337614]. 
This is predicted to reduce the viral load, mitigate disease, and reduce overall hospitalization. 

> While polyclonal antibodies from convalescent plasma can be used as a treatment for COVID-19, this section focuses on current efforts in developing monoclonal neutralizing antibodies against SARS-CoV-2 (excellent reviews regarding convalescent plasma therapy can be found here [@doi:10/ggqr7s; @doi:10.1001/jama.2020.4940]). 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
While polyclonal antibodies from convalescent plasma can be used as a treatment for COVID-19, this section focuses on current efforts in developing monoclonal neutralizing antibodies (nAbs) against SARS-CoV-2 (excellent reviews regarding convalescent plasma therapy can be found here [@doi:10/ggqr7s; @doi:10.1001/jama.2020.4940]). 
```

Due to this high degree of similarity, preexisting antibodies against SARS-CoV-1 were initially considered candidates for neutralizing activity against SARS-CoV-2. 
While some antibodies developed against the SARS-CoV-1 spike protein showed cross-neutralization activity with SARS-CoV-2 [@doi:10.1016/j.tips.2020.07.004; @doi:10.1038/s41586-020-2349-y], others failed to bind to SARS-CoV-2 spike protein at relevant concentrations [@doi:10.1126/science.abb2507]. 
Cross-neutralizing activities were dependent on whether the epitope recognized by the antibodies were conserved between SARS-CoV-1 and SARS-CoV-2 [@doi:10.1016/j.tips.2020.07.004].

The first human monoclonal neutralizing antibody specifically against the SARS-CoV-2 S glycoprotein was developed using hybridoma technology [@doi:10.1101/2020.03.11.987958], where antibody-producing B-cells developed by mice are inserted into myeloma cells to produce a hybrid cell line (the hybridoma) that is grown in culture. 
The 47D11 antibody clone was able to cross-neutralize SARS-CoV-1 and SARS-CoV-2.
This antibody (now ABVV-47D11) has recently entered clinical trials in collaboration with AbbVie. 

> Since then, an extensive monoclonal neutralizing antibody pipeline has been developed to combat the ongoing pandemic, with over 50 different antibodies in clinical trials [@doi:10.1016/j.bsheal.2021.02.001] and two treatments recently receiving emergency use authorization by the FDA.

Reviewer 3: Just curious, this may be a very basic question, does there exist any polyclonal Ab treatment options? Is there a reason that monoclonal Ab are used? My intuition is that you'd have a more robust immune response using polyclonal Ab since they recognize multiple epitopes

Author: Polyclonal Ab treatment = convalescent plasma treatment. Convalescent plasma contains polyclonal antibodies that someones immune system generated in response to an infection. Monoclonal antibodies are often derived from these polyclonal antibody-containing plasma specimens. People screen for the most effective clone in neutralizing pseudotyped viruses etc and then start producing the monoclonal antibodies recombinantly. Reasons for monoclonal antibodies are:
Scalability (can make as much as necessary)
Reproducibility (every person has different polyclonal antibodies in their plasma so there is such a large heterogeneity in product quality)
Accessibility (finding people that are willing to donate plasma etc is cumbersome)

Author: On the one hand side, you are right, polyclonal antibodies are robust and you have the ability to target multiple epitopes but in reality there are usually a few dominant clones that arise during affinity maturation in the b-cell follicles that do the bulk of the work.

Reviewer 3: I see..thank you for clarifying that. That makes sense!

Reviewer 4: Also, antibodies used for treatment must be humanized, by swapping out as much of the mouse portion as possible. otherwise people mount an immune response against them. 

do you define nAB anywhere in the document?

Author: @Jeff-Field that is true when the antibody was raised in mice but most of the COVID antibodies are derived from humans, hence no humanization necessary.

##### Bamlanivimab (LY-CoV555) and Etesevimab (LY-CoV016)

Bamlanivimab is a human monoclonal antibody that was derived from convalescent plasma of a recovered COVID-19 patient based on research from the National Institute for Allergy’s and Infectious Diseases (NIAID) and subsequently developed by AbCellera and Eli Lilly. 
The neutralizing activity of bamlanivimab was initially demonstrated _in vivo_ using a nonhuman primate model [@doi:10.1101/2020.09.30.318972]. 
In these studies, prophylactic Ly-CoV555 infusions protected rhesus macaques from SARS-CoV-2 infection. 
Based on the positive preclinical data, Eli Lilly initiated the first human clinical trial for a monoclonal antibody against SARS-CoV-2. 

> The phase 1 trial, which was conducted in hospitalized COVID-19 patients, was completed in August 2020 ([@clinicaltrials:NCT04411628]).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The phase 1 trial, which was conducted in hospitalized COVID-19 patients, was completed in August 2020 [@clinicaltrials:NCT04411628].
```

Data from this phase 1-3 trial published in the _New England Journal of Medicine_ shows that the REGN-COV2 antibody cocktail reduced viral load, particularly in patients with high viral load or whose endogenous immune response had not yet been initiated [@doi:10.1056/NEJMoa2035002].
However, in patients who already initiated an immune response, exogenous addition of REGN-COV2 did not improve the endogenous immune response.
Both doses were well tolerated with no serious events related to the antibody cocktail.
Based on this data, the FDA granted emergency use authorization for REGN-COV2 in patients with mild to moderate COVID-19 who are at risk to develop severe disease.
Ongoing efforts are trying to evaluate the efficacy of REGN-COV2 to improve clinical outcomes in hospitalized patients [@clinicaltrials:NCT04426695].

##### Viral Resistance to Neutralizing Antibodies

With the ongoing global spread of new SARS-CoV-2 variants, there is a growing concern that mutations in SARS-CoV-2 spike protein could escape antibody neutralization, thereby reducing the efficacy of monoclonal antibody therapeutics and vaccines.

> A comprehensive mutagenesis screen recently identified several amino acid substitutions in the SARS-CoV-2 spike protein that can prevent antibody neutralization [@doi:10.1016/j.chom.2021.01.014].

Reviewer 3: is 'escape from neutralization' the same as 'escape from antibody recognition (i.e. antibody binding)'?

Author: It's one of these situations: You cant have neutralization without binding but you can have binding without neutralization. Antibodies themselves bind the target with their variable region. The constant region of an antibodies isotype is subsequently recognized by the innate immune system that ultimately clears the infection. There are approaches to enhance the efficacy of antibodies by modulating the constant region of an antibody to more effectively engage other immune cells.
